Team Stream

Ciprian Iamandi
studied computer Science
12 years experience as a software developer and consultant
started to learn about data science and machine learning in 2016


Problem:

Dengue is not widely recognized as an important disease to be fought in a systematic way.
The biggest reason for this is probably because the symptoms are not as severe as other similar mosquito transmitted diseases.
This makes Dengue not so visible to the general public and authorities.

—————————

Solution:
To increase Dengue visibility to the general public, we propose a method that helps predicting outbreaks in an innovative way that complements the traditional monitoring methods.

—————————

How we solve it:
  We choose a region to monitor. We decided on Latin America because:
  - language uniformity (only 2 large languages spoken: Spanish and Portugese)
  - relative large Internet penetration (South America) : 66.7% compared to 50.1% world average (www.internetworldstats.com/stats15.htm) -> attach picture; add Central America and Carribeans

—————————

Data : 
- tweets that contain the word ‘Dengue’; source: Twitter.com

Process: 
We collect only the data that has a location attached (only about 10% of the tweets contain location data).

We further filter the tweets and keep only tweets related to personal experience (PET).
To identify the PET based on Text analisys -> more details to be inserted here 
we used a machine learning classification algorithm (Random Forest) to determine which tweets are PET 
Reason:
Personal Experience tweets are more relevant to potential Dengue cases than tweets posted by organizations, public institutions or companies.

Finally we get a set of tweets which are:
-contain ‘Dengue’
-geo-localized
-personal experience tweets

Personal experience tweets examples:
2016-11-15 00:14:22 - Belo Horizonte, Brazil - “To com dengue pela segunda vez do ano só pq arrumei emprego Odeio minha vida” - “I'm dengue for the second time of the year just because I got a job I hate my life“
2016-11-08 20:59:32 - Balneário Camboriú, Brasil - “Pelo menos essa dengue me fez emagrecer mais uns quilinhos Haha” - “At least this dengue made me lose a few more pounds Haha”
2016-11-11 18:52:38 - Tampico, Tamaulipas - “Malditos moscos. Me dio dengue” - “Damn flies. I got dengue“

With these curated tweets we build potential Dengue hotspots using a machine learning clustering algorithm called D-Stream.
-> insert more details here about the algorithm

The output of this algorithm is a list of location based clusters that decay over time.
The visualisation was made with Luciad and QGis
-> insert visualization

Confirming that the clusters are correlated with confirmed Dengue cases:
We downloaded confirmed Dengue cases per region per week from the Health Ministry of Brazil for the first 3 weeks of January 2016.
We projected the tweets on the same map with the Dengue cases.
-> insert picture here
The correlation between the tweets and the confirmed Dengue cases is -> insert number here.

Based on the conclusions above, we can conclude that the presence of clusters based on tweets are a good indicator of the real Dengue cases.

Challenges:
-twitter collection data was difficult because of Twitter API limitations on the number of queries per application. 
-we applied a workaround by scraping the html of the twitter search page
-geo localization api problems with retrieving geographical coordinates for the location of tweets.
-lack of accurate Dengue cases reporting


Future developments:

Update the clustering algorithm that can use streaming data instead of downloaded data.

Data sources to be added:
- google searches for ‘Dengue’; source: Google.com
- facebook statuses that contain ‘Dengue’; source: Facebook.com

Create a web application that enables anybody to check the evolution and emergence of Dengue clusters.


Our solution is:

Actionable
This idea can be implemented into a public, free to use web application that enables anybody to check the evolution and emergence of Dengue clusters.

Because of this, the entry barrier to using the service is very low. People just continue to tweet, search, post.
The more people report Dengue cases, the more accurate the results of our application will be.

It can help educate the internet users on reporting potential Dengue cases.

Scalable
It can be extended to monitor any other region with population connected to the Internet.
It can be applied to monitor other diseases than Dengue.

Sustainable
This solution queries the data from the internet, processes it and then displays Dengue clusters.
Therefore, it can run autonomously, without any manual data input/calculations.
The solution doesn’t store any data that identify users, so their privacy is not threatened.
It can be easily used by public health institution, NGOs locals, or anybody else with Internet access.

